feat: new blog post "Observing Lambdas" (#5990)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2025/observing-lambdas/index.md

Reviewer: General comment for this page: can you replace the word/word-base "ship" ("shipping" etc) with "export"?

(@tiffany76 et al. WDYT?)

request needs to be made, while bundling the configuration increases the
management overhead when trying to control the configuration for multiple
Lambdas.

The simplest way to get started, is with an embedded configuration. For this,
add a file called `collector.yaml` to your function. This is a regular Collector
configuration file. To take advantage of the Lambda specific extensions, they
need to be configured. As an example, the following configuration receives
traces and logs from the telemetry API and sends them to another endpoint:

```yaml
receivers:
 telemetryapi:
exporters:
 otlphttp/external:
   endpoint: "external-collector:4318"
processors:
 batch:
 decouple:
service:
 pipelines:
   traces:
 	receivers: [telemetryapi]
 	processors: [batch,decouple]
 	exporters: [otlphttp/external]
   logs:
 	receivers: [telemetryapi]
 	processors: [batch,decouple]
 	exporters: [otlphttp/external]
```

Afterward, set the `OPENTELEMETRY_COLLECTOR_CONFIG_URI` environment variable to
`/var/task/collector.yaml`. Once the function is redeployed, you’ll see your
function logs appear!

<video controls>
  <source src="./video-lambda-real-time.webm" />

> </video>

Author: Not sure if this is fitting. Screenshots would work here as well but IMHO a video better shows this working in action.

Reviewer 2: I have no issue with adding a video, maybe we can scale it down a little bit since it adds ~2MB to the git tree.

See my [other comment](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/issues/5961#issuecomment-2602439000). This way we can not accept the video as it points to a commercial backend.

Also, if you look at the preview the video is breaking the HTML:

https://deploy-preview-5990--opentelemetry.netlify.app/blog/2025/observing-lambdas/

You need to fine tune that to fit into the page.

---

Personally I prefer a self-contained text blog post, that also provides me with a quick way to setup a backend and send data their. I understand that in this particular case it's a little bit tricky because you can not simply run jaeger on your mac and need something running in AWS, so the video would be fine, if it fits the criteria.

Author: So the video would be fine, as long as the URL and data source name don't contain `grafanacloud` or `grafana.net`? If that's the case, I'll re-record it with a local instance and fit it to the content size

---

I've also considered something self-contained, but as you mentioned, the work of setting up something local and tunneling data there would be more than the rest of the content.

Author: @svrnm I've re-recorded the video on an open source instance so it no longer contains any references to any commercial offerings. I've also compressed it down to 553KiB. It is also contained to the width of the article now (tested on smaller screens & on mobile)

Reviewer: Another strategy would be to post this video on YouTube and embed a link to it in the post (either as a simply link or using https://gohugo.io/shortcodes/youtube/.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for editing the video, looks good to me know, I would be fine with ~500K, we have larger files in the repo already, putting it on youtube is another option, but then we would need to have it under the official otel yt channel

> </p>

Reviewer: Can you add something at the end here to "wrap up" / offer some closing words?

Author: I've added a short explanation & reference to language specific layers - let me know what you think!

frozen afterward. You’re only billed for actual execution time and no longer
need a server to wait for incoming requests. This is also where the term
serverless comes from. Keeping the function alive until metrics can be
collected isn’t really an option and even if you were willing to pay for that,
different invocations will have a completely separate context and not
necessarily know about all the other executions happening simultaneously. You
might now be saying: "I'll just push all the data at the end of my execution, no
issues here!", but that doesn’t solve the issue. You’ll still have to pay for
the time it takes to send the data and with many invocations, this adds up.

But there is another way! Lambda extension layers allow you to run any process
alongside your code, sharing the execution runtime and providing additional
services. With the
[opentelemetry-lambda](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/blob/main/collector/README.md)
extension layer, you get a local endpoint to send data to while it keeps track
of the Lambda lifecycle and ensures your telemetry gets to the storage layer.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---

> title: "Observing Lambdas using the OpenTelemetry Collector Extension Layer"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: Observing Lambdas using the OpenTelemetry Collector Extension Layer
```

author: '[Dominik Süß](https://github.com/theSuess) (Grafana)'

> linkTitle: "Observing Lambdas"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
linkTitle: Observing Lambdas
```

> date: 2025-01-20
> ---

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: 2025-01-20
cSpell:ignore: Dominik
---
```

Getting telemetry data out of modern applications is very straightforward (or at
least it should be). You set up a collector which either receives data from your
application or asks it to provide an up-to-date state of various counters. This
happens every minute or so, and if it’s a second late or early, no one really
bats an eye. But what if the application isn’t around for long? What if every
second waiting for the data to be collected is billed? Then you’re most likely

> thinking of Function-as-a-Service (FaaS) environments, the most well known being

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
thinking of Function-as-a-Service (FaaS) environments, the most well-known being
```

AWS Lambda.

In this execution model, functions are called directly, and the environment is
frozen afterward. You’re only billed for actual execution time and no longer
need a server to wait for incoming requests. This is also where the term

> Serverless comes from. Keeping the function alive until metrics can be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
serverless comes from. Keeping the function alive until metrics can be
```

collected isn’t really an option and even if you were willing to pay for that,
different invocations will have a completely separate context and not
necessarily know about all the other executions happening simultaneously. You
might now be saying: "I'll just push all the data at the end of my execution, no
issues here!", but that doesn’t solve the issue. You’ll still have to pay for
the time it takes to send the data and with many invocations, this adds up.

But there is another way! Lambda extension layers allow you to run any process
alongside your code, sharing the execution runtime and providing additional
services. With the
[opentelemetry-lambda](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/blob/main/collector/README.md)
extension layer, you get a local endpoint to send data to while it keeps track
of the Lambda lifecycle and ensures your telemetry gets to the storage layer.

> 

Reviewer 3: You can delete this extra space.

Reviewer: Done

## How does it work?

When your function is called for the first time, the extension layer starts an

> instance of the OpenTelemetry Collector. The collector build is a stripped down

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
instance of the OpenTelemetry Collector. The Collector build is a stripped down
```

version, providing only components necessary in the context of Lambda. It

> registers with the Lambda [extension api](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/runtimes-extensions-api.html)
> and [telemetry api](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/telemetry-api.html). By doing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
registers with the Lambda [Extensions API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/runtimes-extensions-api.html)
and [Telemetry API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/telemetry-api.html). By doing
```

this, it receives notifications whenever your function is executed, emits a
logline, or the execution context is about to be shut down.

### This is where the magic happens

Up until now, this just seems like extra work for nothing. You'll still have to

> wait for the collector to ship the data, right? This is where the special

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
wait for the Collector to ship the data, right? This is where the special
```

`decouple` processor comes in. It separates the receiving and exporting
components while interfacing with the Lambda lifecycle. This allows for the
Lambda to return, even if not all data has been sent. At the next invocation (or

> on shutdown) the collector continues shipping the data while your function does

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on shutdown) the Collector continues shipping the data while your function does
```

its thing.

> {{< figure src="diagram-execution-timing.svg" caption="Diagram showcasing how execution timing differs with and without a collector">}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="diagram-execution-timing.svg" caption="Diagram showcasing how execution timing differs with and without a Collector">}}
```

## How can I use it?

As of November 2024, the opentelemetry-lambda project publishes [releases of the

> collector extension layer](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/releases/tag/layer-collector%2F0.12.0).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Collector extension layer](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/releases/tag/layer-collector%2F0.12.0).
```

It can be configured through a configuration file hosted either in an S3 bucket
or on an arbitrary HTTP server. It is also possible to bundle the configuration
file with your Lambda code. In both cases, you have tradeoffs to consider.
Remote configuration files add to the cold start duration as an additional
request needs to be made, while bundling the configuration increases the
management overhead when trying to control the configuration for multiple
Lambdas.

> The simplest way to get started, is with an embedded configuration. For this,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The simplest way to get started is with an embedded configuration. For this,
```

add a file called `collector.yaml` to your function. This is a regular Collector
configuration file. To take advantage of the Lambda specific extensions, they
need to be configured. As an example, the following configuration receives

> traces and logs from the telemetry API and sends them to another endpoint:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
traces and logs from the Telemetry API and sends them to another endpoint:
```

---
title: Observing Lambdas using the OpenTelemetry Collector Extension Layer
author: '[Dominik Süß](https://github.com/theSuess) (Grafana)'
linkTitle: Observing Lambdas

> date: 2025-01-20

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2025-01-24
```

cSpell:ignore: Dominik
---

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

of the Lambda lifecycle and ensures your telemetry gets to the storage layer.

## How does it work?

When your function is called for the first time, the extension layer starts an
instance of the OpenTelemetry Collector. The Collector build is a stripped down
version, providing only components necessary in the context of Lambda. It
registers with the Lambda
[Extensions API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/runtimes-extensions-api.html)
and
[Telemetry API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/telemetry-api.html).
By doing this, it receives notifications whenever your function is executed,
emits a logline, or the execution context is about to be shut down.

### This is where the magic happens

Up until now, this just seems like extra work for nothing. You'll still have to
wait for the Collector to ship the data, right? This is where the special
`decouple` processor comes in. It separates the receiving and exporting
components while interfacing with the Lambda lifecycle. This allows for the
Lambda to return, even if not all data has been sent. At the next invocation (or
on shutdown) the Collector continues shipping the data while your function does
its thing.

> {{< figure src="diagram-execution-timing.svg" caption="Diagram showcasing how execution timing differs with and without a Collector">}}

Reviewer 4: The legend text at the bottom of the image is difficult to read when viewed in dark mode.  Consider adding a contrasting background box around the legend text.

Author: Made some improvements which should improve legibility on both dark and light mode - let me know what you think!

Reviewer 4: much better!

As of November 2024, the opentelemetry-lambda project publishes
[releases of the Collector extension layer](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/releases/tag/layer-collector%2F0.12.0).
It can be configured through a configuration file hosted either in an S3 bucket
or on an arbitrary HTTP server. It is also possible to bundle the configuration
file with your Lambda code. In both cases, you have tradeoffs to consider.
Remote configuration files add to the cold start duration as an additional
request needs to be made, while bundling the configuration increases the
management overhead when trying to control the configuration for multiple
Lambdas.

The simplest way to get started is with an embedded configuration. For this, add
a file called `collector.yaml` to your function. This is a regular Collector
configuration file. To take advantage of the Lambda specific extensions, they
need to be configured. As an example, the following configuration receives
traces and logs from the Telemetry API and sends them to another endpoint:

```yaml
receivers:
 telemetryapi:
exporters:
 otlphttp/external:
   endpoint: "external-collector:4318"
processors:
 batch:

>  decouple:

Author: When first trying out the extension layer, I had some issues with the automatic inclusion, so I've added it explicitly to every configuration I've worked with now :grimacing:.

I think it's useful to explicitly include it here to showcase that it's just another processor. What's your take on adding a comment like `# configured by default if omitted: <link to auto configuration in readme>` above the decouple processor?

>  decouple:

Reviewer 4: I think that's a reasonable approach.  If you're ever able to figure out why it wasn't working automatically for you, please feel free to submit a fix.

---
title: Observing Lambdas using the OpenTelemetry Collector Extension Layer
author: '[Dominik Süß](https://github.com/theSuess) (Grafana)'
linkTitle: Observing Lambdas
date: 2025-02-03

> cSpell:ignore: Dominik

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cSpell:ignore: Dominik
sig: FaaS
issue: 5961
```

It can be configured through a configuration file hosted either in an S3 bucket
or on an arbitrary HTTP server. It is also possible to bundle the configuration
file with your Lambda code. In both cases, you have tradeoffs to consider.
Remote configuration files add to the cold start duration as an additional
request needs to be made, while bundling the configuration increases the
management overhead when trying to control the configuration for multiple
Lambdas.

The simplest way to get started is with an embedded configuration. For this, add
a file called `collector.yaml` to your function. This is a regular Collector
configuration file. To take advantage of the Lambda specific extensions, they
need to be configured. As an example, the following configuration receives
traces and logs from the Telemetry API and sends them to another endpoint:

```yaml
# The `decouple` processor is configured by default if omitted.
# It is explicitly added in this example to illustrate the entire pipeline
# More information can be found at
# https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/tree/main/collector#auto-configuration

> 

Reviewer: Let's pull out all of that prose from the YAML file.

~~~suggestion
need to be configured. As an example, the configuration shown next receives
traces and logs from the Telemetry API and sends them to another endpoint.
The `decouple` processor is configured by default if omitted.
It is explicitly added in this example to illustrate the entire pipeline
For more information, see
[Auto-configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/tree/main/collector#auto-configuration).

```yaml
~~~

If you prefer, you can move the prose to be _after_ the YAML.

receivers:
 telemetryapi:
exporters:
 otlphttp/external:
   endpoint: "external-collector:4318"
processors:
 batch:
 decouple:
service:
 pipelines:
   traces:
 	receivers: [telemetryapi]
 	processors: [batch,decouple]
 	exporters: [otlphttp/external]
   logs:
 	receivers: [telemetryapi]
 	processors: [batch,decouple]
 	exporters: [otlphttp/external]
```

Afterward, set the `OPENTELEMETRY_COLLECTOR_CONFIG_URI` environment variable to
`/var/task/collector.yaml`. Once the function is redeployed, you’ll see your
function logs appear! You can see this in action in the video below.

<p>
  <video controls style="width: 100%">
    <source src="./video-lambda-real-time.webm" />
  </video>
</p>

Every log line your Lambda produces will be shipped to the `external-collector`
endpoint specified. You don't need to modify the code at all! From there,
telemetry data flows to your backend as usual. Since the shipping of telemetry
data might be frozen when the lambda is not active, logs can arrive delayed.
They'll either arrive during the next execution or during the shutdown interval.

> If you want further insight into your applications, be sure to also check out
> the
> [language specific auto instrumentation layers](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/?tab=readme-ov-file#extension-layer-language-support).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want further insight into your applications, also see the
[language-specific auto instrumentation layers](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/blob/main/README.md#extension-layer-language-support).
```

---
title: Observing Lambdas using the OpenTelemetry Collector Extension Layer
author: '[Dominik Süß](https://github.com/theSuess) (Grafana)'
linkTitle: Observing Lambdas

> date: 2025-02-03

Reviewer: @svrnm - adjust the date?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2025-02-05
```

Remote configuration files add to the cold start duration as an additional
request needs to be made, while bundling the configuration increases the
management overhead when trying to control the configuration for multiple
Lambdas.

The simplest way to get started is with an embedded configuration. For this, add
a file called `collector.yaml` to your function. This is a regular Collector
configuration file. To take advantage of the Lambda specific extensions, they
need to be configured. As an example, the configuration shown next receives
traces and logs from the Telemetry API and sends them to another endpoint.

```yaml

receivers:
 telemetryapi:
exporters:
 otlphttp/external:
   endpoint: "external-collector:4318"
processors:
 batch:
 decouple:
service:
 pipelines:
   traces:
 	receivers: [telemetryapi]
 	processors: [batch,decouple]
 	exporters: [otlphttp/external]
   logs:
 	receivers: [telemetryapi]
 	processors: [batch,decouple]
 	exporters: [otlphttp/external]
```

The `decouple` processor is configured by default if omitted. It is explicitly
added in this example to illustrate the entire pipeline. For more information,
see

> [Auto-configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/tree/main/collector#auto-configuration).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Autoconfiguration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-lambda/tree/main/collector#auto-configuration).
```
